
### Closing the Reading Gap - Alex Quigley

Quigley opens this book with a celebration of the magical act of reading. Due to the purpose of this book, he has a rather self-selecting, highly-literate readership who are interested in how to support our students develop their literacy. Likely, many of his readership will relate to Quigley’s depiction of the reading-privileges cast on to some and deprived of others. These include growing up in houses with heavy bookshelves; having exciting books of your own; having a parent who is confident enough with their reading that they can read you stories while you watch the mysterious inky shapes before you with growing interest. 

Quigley’s research reveals what is quite familiar to most state school teachers — that children whose formative years are not filled with literacy-nourishing habits arrive at school behind their peers, and the gap only widens year on year, as they are fed on differing vocabulary diets. I was struck by Quigley’s focus on the vocabulary-enhancing powers of reading fiction for pleasure; through fiction, children are introduced to words which are rarely used in everyday speech, and therefore, those children without frequent access to fiction books are deprived of an adequate diet of vocabulary. Here, it seems clear that there must be some community action to support parents and carers who are unconfident in their own reading. Currently, local libraries and community action groups such as Lambeth Early Action Partnership co-ordinate early reading initiatives such as the Doorstep Library. I wonder if schools themselves could do more to support their local community of families (with the required funding of course), as they may already have links with parents or families who could benefit from supportive group reading with their little ones.  

An important shift in the nature of reading takes place between primary and secondary school which again causes the gap to widen between those who are flourishing with their reading, and those who are not. Quigley defines this as the focus shifting from ‘learning to read’ to ‘reading to learn’. Student are used to mainly reading enjoyable works of fiction at primary, and then are suddenly expected to navigate the text-books for the expanded range of subjects they learn (also interesting is the issue that the KS2 SATS pressure railroads non-core subjects from primary learning, meaning subject-specific vocabulary may well be missing by the time they get to secondary). Furthermore, students who are unconfident in their reading suddenly need to rely on this skill to access all the new skills and knowledge expected of them. It seems that perhaps both primary and secondary schools need to have a huge focus on effective reading intervention, including vocabulary practice and comprehension of a range of reading material, particularly in the transition phase, to ensure students are able to make that jump.

As a secondary teacher of English, it may seem surprising that none of my teacher training focused on the process of learning to read. I am aware of some of the terminology, like ‘phonics’, but really couldn’t say more than that it’s to do with decoding sound. The focus of teaching reading in English at secondary level assumes a certain level of reading mastery, as we focus on reading great novels or plays, discussing the central themes, exploring perspectives and developing student’s analysis of writer’s methods. I have my strategies for scaffolding reading in my subject - ensuring the texts are engaging and rich (I also hate reading boring material!), introducing new vocabulary prior to reading, regular comprehension checks, ensuring the texts are engaging and rich, reciprocal guided reading, using images alongside to support EAL readers etc. However, much of what Quigley discusses as being integral to subject-specific study, such as the ability to read text-books like a ‘historian, geographer or scientist’… well, I wouldn’t want that to be left to the English department to sort out, because actually, text-books really aren’t our kind of books (and it sounds decidedly… dull). 

As an teacher of English at secondary school, my understanding of the dense, information-heavy textbooks used to teach history or science dates back to my own years of studying at school. I’m interested in how teachers might teach the reading of this information to students, but I also have some concerns: So much of successful teaching in large mixed-ability state school classes is based on engagement. I have to say, preparing to teach a stand-alone lesson on how to read dense, dry textbooks to a mixed ability year 9 group would fill me with absolute dread. Rather than distinct teaching of this reading skill, is this something which should be woven into each subject’s scheme of work, as they engage with this type of reading material? Teachers could include regular, fun and quick comprehension quizzes alongside required reading which involves some skills in inference. Teachers should introduce key vocabulary before reading it, and ensure they revisit and quiz students on their acquisition of new vocabulary to ensure it sticks around. Across subjects, students should be encouraged to practise figuring out the meaning of certain unknown words based on the context of the sentence they are in, in order to grow confidence when coming across unknown words in the future.

In the two schools I have taught in, encouraging some students to read can feel like you enforcing the cruellest kind of torture on them. Some students get to a certain age, and all buy-in has been lost. I’ve experienced the kind of school where students are forced to carry a book with them and get it out on command, but there I saw that books became a symbol of subservience, and evoked no genuine wonder, or even interest, for the students. They were more of a prop for discipline. Routines such as this are not going to encourage a lifetime of reading. I have heard of practices in other schools of each year group are given copies of a book which they read together in form-time. I like the sound of this, as it gets to the root of why we all love reading — shared narratives connect us, new perspectives open our minds and the words we learn become words we can use ourselves as we build our own lives, the foundation of which grows with every word we acquire. 
