### Big Magic by Elizabeth Gilbert

I started reading this book after glowing recommendations from my musician housemate. Her dedication to her craft has inspired me over the past few months of lockdown. While I was at work, I never noticed how every morning she begins practising her vocal exercises without fail, even when her voice hurts or she is lacking purpose and motivation. Now we share our home as our workspace, her vocal scales each morning are a regular reminder that seemingly magical artistic outcomes don’t just happen, but they are one part of a momentous process which requires one’s unequivocal commitment, every single day. This news may not fill fledgling creatives with joy, as these dogged routines appear as the unglamorous, gnarly insides of creativity, deprived of the sparkly, heady excitement of perfect performances, avant-garde exhibitions and doting reviews… However, in Big Magic, Elizabeth Gilbert turns this misconception on it’s head, and makes it dizzy with the potential joy of creative living. In her fanciful and beautifully imaginative prose, she cuts through many of the false narratives and beliefs that frequently get in the way of the artist, and debilitate their creative life-force. 

There is something deliciously contagious about Gilbert’s passion for writing. Most of Big Magic is autobiographical; she is known for her hugely successful, chart-topping memoir Eat Pray Love, yet most of the references to her own career concern moments of diligence, pragmatism and even failure. She describes how she committed to being a writer from the age of 16 — note that she didn’t commit to being a successful writer, or even a full-time writer. She committed only to what what she herself could control. Throughout Big Magic, Gilbert emphasises that external creative success is not a controllable outcome, and such validation can never be the main driver for creativity. She provides compelling reasons for this — if one is chasing recognition or monetary rewards, the likely failure of that journey may crush the delicate and precious creative force within, and the artist may never make work again, which would be a huge loss to the world of creativity. Therefore, Gilbert argues, keep your day-job, but maintain your commitment to making and sharing your work. Creative living must value the beauty of the process, the exquisite commitment to making, above all else. 

Many of Gilbert’s values are set out in whimsical forms, such as her characterisation of ‘inspiration’ as a magical, external creature, who you had better treat right for fear they give up on you and your commitment to their creation. These ‘inspirations’ exist in the world, with or without you, and if you are lucky enough that one chooses you to attach itself to, you need to honour it. She recommends you dress up for your inspiration, show it your best side, seduce it, prioritise your time with it, as though your inspiration in an illicit lover whose leaving you could not bear to see. Here, I like how Gilbert emphasises how there is never a dearth of ideas — in fact, people may have the same inspiration, simultaneously, or hundreds of years apart — but there is a dearth of people willing to commit their time and talents to ensuring something is created from it. This notion that there are ideas out there, just begging to be realised, awards the creative with a responsibility to show up for their project, and animate this idea through their unique talents. 

Beyond Gilbert’s own creative life, Big Magic contains references to a myriad of anecdotes from her friends, who have weathered the highs and lows of creative living — some with more to show from it than others. Pertinent to me was the friend whose unfortunate combination of laziness and perfectionism allowed him to become a conscientious objector of creative writing. Despite his substantial talent, he never wrote his book. I related to what she described — his fear of not being interesting enough, unique enough, talented enough, to do the same work as his literary idols. With this heavy weight of expectation and fear of failure on his shoulders, he never achieved that which he was capable of. Yet she reiterates, it is the light and wondrous privilege of creating the work which is always fully open to you. You don’t need a Masters to do it. No-one is going to give you permission to be a writer, artist, etcetera, but then equally, no-one can ban you from doing it. The focus is on doing the verb, rather worrying about whether you’re worthy to be the noun.

Big Magic has inspired me to be more committed to the craft of writing, and I’m sure that with more dogged commitment and less anxious-ego-suffocation, I will certainly be a better writer than I am now. I am currently recommending this book to everyone I know. It’s an encouraging and invigorating call to arms for creative living, which will hopefully result in a few more songs, novels and paintings taking life. 
